<style>
    p {
        margin: 1em 0;
    }
</style>

<h1 class="unnumbered" id="preface">Preface</h1>
<p>Artificial Intelligence (AI) is rapidly embedding itself within
militaries, economies, and societies, reshaping their very foundations.
Given the depth and breadth of its consequences, it has never been more
pressing to understand how to ensure that AI systems are safe, ethical,
and have a positive societal impact.<p>
This textbook aims to provide a comprehensive approach to understanding
AI risk. Our primary goals include consolidating fragmented knowledge on
AI risk, increasing the precision of core ideas and reducing barriers to
entry by making content simpler and more comprehensible. The book has
been designed to be accessible to readers from diverse academic
backgrounds. You do not need to have studied AI, philosophy, or other
such topics. The content is skimmable and somewhat modular, so that you
can choose which chapters to read. We introduce formulas in a few places 
to specify claims more precisely, but readers should be able to understand the main points without these.<p>

AI risk is multidisciplinary. Most people think problems in AI risk in terms of largely implicit conceptual 
models which have significant consequences for the content of their thought, and we aim to replace these implicit 
models with explicit, time-tested models. A full understanding of the risks posed by AI requires knowledge in several
 disparate academic disciplines, which have so far not been combined in a single text. This book was written to fill 
that gap and adequately equip readers to analyze AI risk. This textbook moves beyond the confines of machine learning 
to provide a holistic understanding of AI risk. We draw on well-established ideas and frameworks from the fields of 
engineering, economics, biology, complex systems, philosophy and other disciplines that can provide insights into AI 
risks and how to manage them. Our aim is to equip readers with a solid understanding of the technical, ethical, and 
governance challenges that we will need to meet in order to harness advanced AI in a beneficial way.<p>

In order to have a solid grasp of the challenges of AI safety, it is important to consider the broader context within 
which AI systems are being developed and applied. The decisions of and interplay between AI developers, policy-makers, 
militaries and other actors will play an important role in shaping this context. Since AI influences many different spheres,
 we have deliberately selected time-tested, formal frameworks to provide multiple lenses for thinking about AI, relevant actors,
 and AI's impacts. The frameworks and concepts we use are highly general and are useful for reasoning about various forms of 
intelligence, ranging from individual human beings to corporations, states, and AI systems. While some sections of the book 
focus more directly on AI risks that have already been identified and discussed today, others set out a systematic introduction
 to ideas from game theory, complex systems, international relations, and more. We hope that providing these flexible conceptual
 tools will help readers to adapt robustly to the ever-changing landscape of AI risks.<p>

This book does not aim to be the final word on all possible AI risks, as
research on AI risk is still relatively new. Rather, we aim to highlight
some concepts and frameworks that we have found highly productive for
thinking about various AI risks. Given the broad scope of the problems
involved, it is easy to become disoriented. Our hope is that this
textbook provides some scaffolding for others to use as they build out a
more detailed picture of these risks and the potential responses to
them.<p>
The textbook’s content falls into three sections: AI and Societal-Scale Risks, Safety,
 and Ethics and Society. In the AI and Societal-Scale Risks section, we outline major 
categories of AI risks and introduce some key features of modern AI systems. In the Safety
 section, we discuss how to make individual AI systems more safe. However, if we can make them 
safe, how should we direct them? To answer this, we turn to the Ethics and Society section 
and discuss how to make AI systems that promote our most important values. In this section, 
we also explore the numerous challenges that emerge when there are multiple AI systems or 
multiple AI developers with competing interests.<p>

The AI and Societal-Scale Risks section starts with an informal overview of AI risks, 
which summarises many of the key concerns discussed in this book. We
outline some scenarios where AI systems could cause catastrophic
outcomes. We split risks across four categories: malicious use, AI arms
race dynamics, organizational risks, and rogue AIs. These categories can
be loosely mapped onto the risks discussed in more depth in Governance, Collective Action Problems, Safety Engineering, and Single-Agent Safety
chapters, respectively. However, this mapping is imperfect as many of
the risks and frameworks discussed in the textbook are more general and
cut across scenarios. Nonetheless, we hope that the scenarios in this first chapter give
readers a more concrete picture of the risks that we explore in this
book. The AI Fundamentals chapter gives an accessible and non-mathematical explanation of current AI
systems, setting out concepts in machine learning, deep learning, scaling laws, and so on. 
This provides the necessary foundations for the discussion of
the safety of individual AI systems in the next section.<p>

The Safety section aims to provide an overview of core challenges in safely building advanced AI systems.
 It draws on insights from both machine learning research and from general theories of safety engineering
 and complex systems which provide a powerful lens for understanding these issues. In Single-Agent Safety, 
we explore challenges in making individual AI systems safer, such as bias, transparency, and emergence. 
In Safety Engineering, we discuss principles for creating safer organizations and how these may apply 
to those developing and deploying AI. The need for a robust safety culture at organizations developing AI 
is crucial, so organizations do not prioritize profit at the expense of safety. Next, in Complex Systems,
 we show that analyzing AIs as complex systems helps us to better understand the difficulty of predicting 
how they will respond to external pressures or controlling the goals that may emerge in such systems. 
More generally, this chapter provides us with a useful vocabulary for discussing diverse systems of interest.<p>

The Ethics and Society section focuses on how to instill beneficial objectives and constraints in AI systems and
 how to enable effective collaboration between stakeholders to mitigate risks. In the Beneficial AI and Machine Ethics chapter, 
we introduce the challenge of giving AI systems objectives that will reliably lead to beneficial outcomes for society,
 and discuss various proposals along with the challenges they face. In Collective Action Problems, we utilize game theory to 
illustrate the many ways in which multiple agents (humans, AIs, groups of humans and AIs) can fail to secure good outcomes
 and come into conflict. We also consider the evolutionary dynamics shaping AI development and how these drive AI risks. 
These frameworks help us to understand the challenges of managing competitive pressures between AI developers, militaries,
 or AI systems themselves. Finally, in the Governance chapter, we discuss strategic variables such as the 
rate at which AI systems evolves and how widely access to powerful AI systems is distributed. We introduce a variety of 
potential paths for managing AI risks, including corporate governance, national regulation, and international coordination. <p>

The website for this textbook (www.aisafetybook.com) includes a range of additional content. It contains further educational 
resources such as videos, slides, quizzes and discussion questions. For readers interested in contributing to mitigating risks
 from AI, it offers some brief suggestions and links to other resources on this topic. A range of appendices can also be found
 on the website with further material that could not be included in the textbook itself. <p>

<p>
Dan Hendrycks<p>
Center for AI Safety</p>
